JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
Candidates race toward a
critical day of primaries
tomorrow, with eyes on Ohio and
Florida as
potential campaign
game-changers.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead this
Monday, we sit
down with the new head of the
U.N. Refugee
Agency, Filippo Grandi, on the
eve of the
fifth anniversary of the Syrian
civil war.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And with public
media partners
Marketplace and "Frontline," we
launch a new
series, How the Deck Is Stacked,
reported
by Kai Ryssdal, on why many
Americans feel
they can't get ahead.
KAI RYSSDAL, Marketplace: We
have added a
million jobs in this economy
since the last
time we went out in the field in
September,
and yet people aren't feeling
it. And that
to me is the most interesting
thing, that
what's going on here is not
being widely shared
down at the middle and bottom
ranges of this
economy.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: After a weekend of
turmoil on
the presidential campaign trail,
candidates
got down to business with just
hours to go
until polls open in another
critical series
of primaries.
But the day began with more
protests at a
Donald Trump rally, this time in
North Carolina.
The commotion was met, at first,
by silence
from the Republican
front-runner, but when
chants of "Trump" and "USA"
drowned out the
demonstrators, the billionaire
businessman
spoke up.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
But the press is now calling.
They're saying,
oh, but there's such violence.
No violence.
You know, how many people have
been hurt at
our rallies? I think like
basically none,
other than I guess maybe
somebody got hit
once.
There's no violence. There's
lovefests. These
are lovefests.
GWEN IFILL: It was a similar
scene later in
the day in Florida. The tumult
comes amid
a scramble for votes in five
states tomorrow,
featuring pivotal primaries in
Florida and
Ohio.
Focusing on his must-win home
state, John
Kasich started his day in
Youngstown, taking
aim at Trump.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate:
Leadership is not dividing
people. Leadership
is not encouraging a toxic
environment where
we blame one group because of
the failure
or success of another. This
country is about
us coming together. This country
is not about
us tearing each other down or
having fist-fights
at a campaign rally. That's not
what America
is.
GWEN IFILL: Later in the day,
Kasich was joined
by another Trump critic, 2012
Republican nominee
Mitt Romney.
MITT ROMNEY (R), Former
Presidential Candidate:
You look at this guy and, unlike
the other
people running, he has a real
track record.
He has the kind of record that
you want in
Washington. And that's why I'm
convinced that
you're going to do the right
thing tomorrow.
Agreed?
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate:
Tomorrow's the day where we're
going to shock
the country.
GWEN IFILL: Senator Marco Rubio,
like Kasich,
has also taken a similar home
state focus,
but in Florida. The winner in
either state
will take home all the
delegates. And, as
in Ohio, front-runner Trump
poses the greatest
threat.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO: Tomorrow, we
have a chance
to make a powerful statement to
the country.
And that is that the Republican
Party is not
going to allow itself to be
hijacked by fake
conservatives and people who go
around dividing
us against each other.
GWEN IFILL: For Texas Senator
Ted Cruz, Illinois
provides a ripe target.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
Donald Trump has made billions
buying influence
from politicians, supporting
liberal Democratic
politicians and supporting the
Republican
establishment, all at the
expense of working
men and women.
GWEN IFILL: Democrat Hillary
Clinton campaigned
in Illinois as well, meeting
with Latino activists
and visiting a memorial for
victims of gun
violence.
At a rally, she jabbed at
Republicans' economic
proposals.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Folks who get excited by the
rhetoric and
the demagoguery on the
Republican side need
to be reminded that they are
George W. Bush
on steroids.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Their
economic plans
-- their economic plans, each
and every one
of them would throw us back into
the mess
that President Obama was able to
dig us out
of.
GWEN IFILL: And back in Ohio,
Bernie Sanders
predicted he'd beat Clinton, as
he hit her
again for her Wall Street
speeches.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
If you get paid $225,000 for a
speech, it
must be an extraordinary speech.
It must be
mind-blowing. It must be
Shakespearian. It
should be released to the
American people.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: But, as with the
Republicans,
the day's main target was Trump.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Bringing
our people together
will always trump separating us
and dividing
us up.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: We have
to have a
big vote tomorrow that can send
a strong message
that love trumps hate.
GWEN IFILL: Clinton called on
Democrats to
unify around her as the best
chance to defeat
Trump.
We will have more from
"NewsHour" correspondent
John Yang, who is in the
battleground state
of Ohio, right after the news
summary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: Russian
President Vladimir Putin ordered
his armed
forces to begin pulling out of
Syria. He said
it's because Russia's military
intervention
has achieved its objectives, as
a new round
of Syrian peace talks got under
way in Geneva.
Putin discussed his decision
today by phone
with President Obama, who
welcomed the move.
Syria's President Bashar Assad
said the action
was coordinated, and France's
defense minister
said Russia has -- quote --
"practically stopped
hitting" moderate Syrian rebels.
For more on Putin's
announcement, I spoke
late this afternoon with Nathan
Hodge, Moscow
bureau chief for The Wall Street
Journal.
Welcome, Nathan.
So, U.S. officials say they have
seen no evidence
yet of any movement by Russian
forces. Is
President Putin believed to be
serious about
this?
NATHAN HODGE, The Wall Street
Journal: Well
there, didn't seem to be much
evidence, according
to the U.S. officials that we
had spoken to,
that Russians were ever planning
to stay for
the long haul.
But this announcement certainly
comes as a
surprise, as much of a surprise
in many ways
as Russia's decision to commence
this military
operation back at the end of
September, although
it was preceded by a speech that
President
Putin delivered at the U.N.
where he said
that Russia wanted to create an
alliance against
terrorism.
And he's cast this campaign as
supporting
the Assad regime as the best
bulwark against
Islamic State and other
extremist groups.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, what is it
exactly that
it's believed Putin's forces
have accomplished
in Syria? Because, as you said,
I mean, he
said this was intended to go
after terrorists,
but we know that civilians,
Syrian civilians
have been targeted. Hundreds, if
not thousands
of them have been killed.
NATHAN HODGE: Right, and there
have been accusations
leveled against the Russians of
the indiscriminate
use of force and the use of
weaponry that
has displaced lots of people and
caused civilian
harm, allegations, of course,
that the Russians
have pushed back quite hard
against.
But what this actually the
campaign did, in
many ways, the introduction of
Russian airpower
in many ways reversed the
momentum. Back last
summer, even President Assad had
conceded
that he was having a difficult
time, because
of defections, holding ground in
Syria.
So this, in many ways, they have
-- it's hard
to say if this is really Putin's
mission accomplished
moment yet, but they did
succeed, Russian
airpower did succeed in changing
the momentum
on the ground in Syria. And in
recent weeks,
they have been pressing a very
strong offensive
in the north of the country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what is this
pullout, what
effect is it expected to have on
the course
of the war there?
NATHAN HODGE: Well, what Syrian
opposition
groups are telling us is, we're
waiting to
see.
Doesn't necessarily mean that
Putin is withdrawing
all of his support entirely.
Putin's spokesman
said that Russia intends to
actually keep
the base or keep bases in Syria.
But what
does seem to be happening is
that maybe Russia
could be exerting a little bit
more pressure
on Bashar al-Assad to negotiate
in earnest.
So, once again, Putin has
managed to insert
himself quite forcefully into
global affairs
and in many ways set the agenda
here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nathan Hodge of
The Wall Street
Journal reporting from Moscow,
we thank you.
NATHAN HODGE: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Also today, Turkey
struck back
at Kurdish rebel groups they
believe were
responsible for yesterday's
deadly suicide
bombing in Ankara. Authorities
detained 11
people, and Turkish warplanes
pounded Kurdish
military sites in Northern Iraq.
Sunday's
blast rocked a busy thoroughfare
in the capital,
killing 37 people and wounding
more than 100.
Today, Turkey's prime minister
pledged further
retaliation.
AHMET DAVUTOGLU, Turkish Prime
Minister (through
translator): I am calling on
terrorist organizations
and the forces behind them. You
cannot weaken
our will. Last night, after this
incident,
our armed forces carried out
comprehensive
operations. Our fight against
these terrorist
organizations continue with
resolve.
GWEN IFILL: Yesterday's attack
comes just
one month after another suicide
bombing targeted
Ankara, killing 29 people.
Kurdish rebels
claimed responsibility for that
blast.
JUDY WOODRUFF: An Amtrak
passenger train derailed
early this morning in rural
Southwestern Kansas,
injuring 32 people. None of
their wounds were
life-threatening. A government
official told
the Associated Press the train's
engineer
noticed a bend in the rail and
hit the emergency
brakes shortly before it went
off the tracks.
Emergency crews rushed to rescue
the more
than 140 people on board.
REX BEEMER, Gray County
Assistant Emergency
Manager: Upon arrival, we found
Amtrak had
overturned about 2.5 miles west
of Cimarron.
We have about seven cars that
are laying on
their sides. We have taken and
evacuated all
the patients and personnel out
of the train
at this time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Federal
investigators are on
the scene to try to determine
the cause of
the derailment. The county's
sheriff said
they're looking into whether an
earlier unreported
vehicle accident could have
damaged the rails.
GWEN IFILL: Southern states
braced for a new
round of flooding today that
threatened to
damage hundreds more homes.
Officials warned
the swollen Pearl River along
the Louisiana
and Mississippi border could
reach 21 feet,
the highest level in over three
decades.
Since last week, the flooding
has killed four
people, and damaged nearly 5,000
homes in
Louisiana. President Obama
signed a disaster
declaration for the state
yesterday.
Stocks finished flat on Wall
Street today,
as investors awaited the outcome
of the Federal
Reserve's meeting later this
week. The Dow
Jones industrial average gained
nearly 16
points to close at 17229. The
Nasdaq rose
almost two points, and the S&P
500 slipped
two.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour":
John Kasich tries to thwart
Donald Trump in
Ohio, and why Florida could be a
big win or
bust for Marco Rubio; the head
of the U.N.
Refugee Agency, as Syria marks
five years
into its civil war; plus, we
launch a new
series exploring Americans'
views on the economy.
Tomorrow is an important day for
the presidential
race in both parties, with
primaries being
held in five major states. One
of the biggest
prizes is Ohio. No Republican
has won the
White House without winning the
Buckeye State.
And this year, it's taken on
heightened importance
in the effort to derail Donald
Trump's path
to the Republican nomination.
"NewsHour" correspondent John
Yang reports
from Ohio.
JOHN YANG: As Ohio Governor John
Kasich and
Donald Trump crisscrossed the
Buckeye State,
campaigning for tomorrow's
primary:
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Oh, I love Ohio.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate:
It's about time we had an Ohioan
become president
of the United States. It's been
far too long.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: More is at stake than
just 66 delegates
in this winner-take-all contest.
GOV. JOHN KASICH: Look, I'm
going to win in
Ohio.
DONALD TRUMP: We really want to
win Ohio.
JOHN YANG: Ohio Republicans say
they're battling
for nothing less than their
party's future.
DONALD TRUMP: They don't like
liars.
JOHN YANG: And the two men's
styles couldn't
be more different.
GOV. JOHN KASICH: So, we will
fix these things
when we remember that we're
Americans and
not Republicans and Democrats
first, but Americans
first, and work together and
lift this country.
We will fix this.
(APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: We're going to
build the wall,
folks. Don't worry about it.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: Who's going to pay
for the wall?
AUDIENCE: Mexico!
DONALD TRUMP: Who?
JOHN YANG: And it goes beyond
style. Party
leaders fear Trump isn't a real
conservative,
says Paul Beck, a political
scientist at Ohio
State University.
PAUL BECK, Ohio State
University: That is
what is scaring Republican
leaders maybe more
than anything is that, if Trump
gets the nomination
and if he wins the presidency,
he redefines
the party, and he moves the
party away from
what it has been for almost
forever.
JOHN YANG: That's why the state
party is throwing
its full weight behind Kasich.
MAN: I'm a volunteer for
Governor Kasich's
presidential campaign. How are
you this evening?
JOHN YANG: A popular second-term
governor
and former nine-term
congressman.
MAN: We will protect our
favorite son for
the White House in 2016.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: Franklin County
Auditor Clarence
Mingo said he wouldn't support
Trump as his
party's nominee.
CLARENCE MINGO, Franklin County
Auditor: It's
a national embarrassment to have
a gentleman
who has insulted the disabled,
the war record
of an American hero like John
McCain, insulted
minorities. It's not acceptable.
It's un-American.
And I fear that, long term, the
nation and
the party will pay the price for
this conduct.
JOHN YANG: Matt Borges is the
state party's
chairman.
MATT BORGES, Ohio Republican
Party Chairman:
Everyone knows you can't get a
Republican
elected to the White House
without carrying
Ohio. And the candidate who
gives us the best
chance to get Ohio of course is
John Kasich.
So, maybe it isn't so much about
stopping
Donald Trump as it is about
making sure we
select the right nominee, and
that person
should be John Kasich.
JOHN YANG: But that's not what
voters said
at a Trump rally this weekend in
Dayton.
So, what brings you out today?
BRENDA HARDESTY, Trump
Supporter: I want to
see this man. He's the man.
JOHN YANG: Is he your man for
Tuesday?
BRENDA HARDESTY: He is my man.
JOHN YANG: Take Brenda Hardesty.
BRENDA HARDESTY: I am a
Democrat, but I have
flipped this year because there
is nobody
on that side. And Trump, he's
just -- I don't
know. He's our future, you know?
He's just
our future.
JOHN YANG: Loretta Brown
volunteered at the
event.
LORETTA BROWN, Trump Volunteer:
We are financially
sick, and this is the doctor
that's going
to make it well. That's what
America needs.
That's what the people need.
They need their
jobs back, and, financially, the
country needs
his help.
JOHN YANG: Even waiting in line
at a Kasich
event in Moraine, undecided
voter Judy Harleman
says he's a good governor, but
she may vote
for Trump anyway.
JUDY HARLEMAN, Ohio Voter: He's
a businessman,
and I think that's what
Washington needs now.
There is just too much going on
that's not
right, right now.
JOHN YANG: Others say they
prefer Kasich's
temperament and experience. Bill
Reridan is
a retired engineer.
BILL RERIDAN, Kasich Supporter:
He's willing
to stand up for his own beliefs
and is not,
you know, trying to make a big
thing out of
it, but he's telling the truth
and he's done
a good job in Ohio.
JOHN YANG: What gave him the
edge over Trump,
in your mind?
BILL RERIDAN: Just because he's
level-headed
and has good common sense.
JOHN YANG: This will be the
first time Ryan
Ritchey votes for president.
RYAN RITCHEY, Kasich Supporter:
Trump has
gone at this very
unprofessionally. The presidency
is something that should be
taken very seriously.
It's not something that you can
just walk
into, not something you can
insult your way
to. And John Kasich is the only
adult left
in this race.
MAN: And tonight's rally will be
postponed.
JOHN YANG: On Friday, violence
erupted after
Trump canceled a planned rally
in Chicago.
Kasich, who hadn't engaged
Trump, scolded
the businessman.
GOV. JOHN KASICH: Donald Trump
has created
a toxic environment. There is no
place for
a national leader to prey on the
fears of
people who live in our great
country.
JOHN YANG: Trump says Kasich
isn't strong
enough.
DONALD TRUMP: Kasich is a baby.
He's a baby.
He can't be president. He can't
be president.
Too many problems.
JOHN YANG: Voters have already
been casting
ballots for nearly a month, even
as the governor
and the billionaire intensify
their battle
over the airwaves.
NARRATOR: Kasich gave Ohio
Obamacare and increased
our budget more than any
governor in the U.S.
We don't need him in Ohio and we
certainly
don't need him in Washington.
NARRATOR: As polls showed Donald
Trump leading
Ohio, he attacked our John
Kasich with unhinged,
bold-faced lies.
JOHN YANG: And at the
grassroots.
WOMAN: Hi. We're stopping by on
behalf of
my brother, John Kasich.
WOMAN: Hi. Hello. My name is
Christina and
I'm with the Trump campaign.
JOHN YANG: Party leaders'
concerns go beyond
the primary. Some worry that
Trump at the
top of the ticket could hurt
Republican candidates
all the way down the ballot.
SEN. ROB PORTMAN (R), Ohio: He's
done a great
job for us as governor and he
deserves to
be president of the United
States.
JOHN YANG: Like Senator Rob
Portman, who's
been at Kasich's side on the
campaign trail.
SEN. ROB PORTMAN: If there are a
number of
Ohio Republicans, people who
would otherwise
vote Republican almost
automatically, who
say I just cannot stomach this
ticket with
Donald Trump at the top, I can't
vote Democratic,
that would be a violation of
everything I
believe in, and so I'm just not
going to turn
out, and it, I think, is a
legitimate worry.
JOHN YANG: With so much at
stake...
DONALD TRUMP: Are we going to
win Ohio?
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: ... Trump's path to
the nomination...
GOV. JOHN KASICH: So, now we're
here. Please
don't screw this up for me. OK?
(LAUGHTER)
JOHN YANG: ... the survival of
Kasich's campaign
and the future of Republican
Party, Ohio Republicans'
hopes for a Kasich win tomorrow
are more than
just a matter of Buckeye pride.
John Kasich now acknowledges
that if he loses
his home state tomorrow, it's
probably the
end of the road for him, or, as
he puts it,
he stays home. A Trump loss here
in Ohio would
complicate his drive for a first
ballot nomination,
but not necessarily end it.
But, Judy, it would probably
certainly put
visions of a brokered convention
dancing in
the anti-Trump forces' heads --
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hmm.
So, hi, John. So, tell us,
there's also a
serious race going on between
the Democrats
in Ohio, Hillary Clinton and
Bernie Sanders.
Tell us a little bit about that
looks like.
JOHN YANG: Well, the Bernie
Sanders campaign
really hopes tomorrow that they
can show that
Michigan was not a fluke. They
have high hopes
for Ohio. When they look at
Ohio, they see
a lot of the things that helped
them in Michigan,
industrial manufacturing jobs
that have gone
overseas, a slow recovery.
Ohio only got back to their
pre-recession
employment level in October,
much later than
a lot of other states. So,
Sanders is hitting
hard on the trade issue, both in
speeches
and in rallies and on
television. This morning,
he added a stop in Youngstown, a
place where
the steel industry used to be
big, but no
more.
They also see Ohio as a home to
a lot of little
college towns across the state,
which would
play to his strength with young
people. For
their part, the Clinton campaign
says only
that they expect a close race
tomorrow, but
they had been talking about
being here today.
They did not. They were not.
They were in
Illinois and North Carolina
instead, and tomorrow
night, to watch the election
returns, they
will be not here, but in Florida
-- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, John, just
quickly, what
about television advertising?
Is that playing much of a role
on the Democratic
side?
JOHN YANG: It is -- I mean, just
like last
time, Ohio is blanketed with
television ads.
It's hard to watch television
and not see
even the same Sanders ad or
Clinton ad repeating.
But a lot of people here say
that it is so
saturated that it becomes
background noise,
that it may not really be having
an effect
-- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Yang
reporting for us
from Ohio, and you will be there
tomorrow
when they're voting. Thanks.
GWEN IFILL: Ohio is key, but
votes in Florida,
Illinois, Missouri and North
Carolina could
also determine the future of the
race for
Democrats and Republicans.
For that, we turn to Politics
Monday, with
Amy Walter of The Cook Political
Report and
Stuart Rothenberg of The
Rothenberg & Gonzales
Political Report.
Welcome to you both.
Amy, I want to start with you.
For every candidate not named
Trump, how critical
is tomorrow?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Very
critical.
Of course, Trump is -- it is
important as
well. But I think there are two
people whose
future begins or ends tomorrow.
One of those
is Marco Rubio, who's been
hunkering down
in Florida, hoping that maybe
that those polls
showing him down double digits
are wrong and
things can turn around in the
last few hours
here before voting begins. Sort
of doubtful.
If he loses his home state, he
doesn't move
on. John Kasich, of course, as
we just learned
in the piece before this,
counting on Ohio
to deliver him the home state.
However, that
doesn't mean that John Kasich is
in the hunt
for the nomination. All it means
is that he
denied Donald Trump the ability
to sort of
run away with the day and amass
enough delegates
to stay on the path to winning
the 1,237 delegates
he would need to be the outright
nominee before
we hit the Cleveland, before we
hit the Cleveland
Republican Convention.
Kasich would still be a spoiler,
in other
words, splitting up the votes
once again between
the Trump and the non-Trump, and
probably
leading us to what could be a
contested convention.
GWEN IFILL: So, Stu, for a
while, it was Marco
Rubio as a non-Trump and now
it's John Kasich?
STUART ROTHENBERG, Editor and
Publisher, The
Rothenberg & Gonzales Political
Report: Well,
that's what it looks like,
because Rubio seems
to be floundering in the polls
in his own
state and other states.
Somehow, the air went out of the
balloon pretty
quickly for Marco Rubio, and now
all the attention
is on John Kasich. Amy is right.
And it's
really sort of funny. This is --
Kasich has
not put together a national
campaign for the
Republican nomination.
He's fought in a couple of
states. Michigan,
he came in narrowly in third.
And it's almost
as if, if he wins Ohio, it's
almost as if
he's the favorite son. And
there's a question
as to whether he can broaden his
appeal beyond
that.
But I think the Kasich people
will say, we're
the only game in town. We're the
only establishment
game in town. Even though John
Kasich says
he's not establishment, that is
who backing
him.
GWEN IFILL: Let's say...
(CROSSTALK)
STUART ROTHENBERG: Sure.
GWEN IFILL: ... at this point.
Amy, aside from Ohio and
Florida, which we
have heard so much about, we're
also seeing
primaries tomorrow in Illinois,
North Carolina
and Missouri.
AMY WALTER: Yes, and for the two
parties,
you have very different
scenarios playing
out here.
The other thing I want to point
out is, Ted
Cruz is still in this race on
the Republican
side, and he actually has won
more votes and
more delegates than John Kasich
or Marco Rubio.
So, he's likely to stay in this
race as well
regardless of where the results
are.
He may be able to pick up a win
and pick up
some delegates in Missouri. He's
also looking
to pick up delegates in
Illinois. The question
of whether Trump goes is not
just Ohio and
Florida, whether he can sweep
those two states,
but whether he does well enough
in Ohio -- I'm
sorry -- in Missouri and
Illinois that he
can pick up enough delegates.
Because of the way that they
proportion out
their delegates there, he could
actually get
a big lead even while he loses
Ohio narrowly
to John Kasich. So, the math
will be very
important to watch.
On the Democratic side, we're
watching for
almost a rerun of what we saw on
the -- in
Michigan, which is Bernie
Sanders likely to
do well Ohio, Illinois and
Missouri, Hillary
Clinton likely to do well in
Florida and North
Carolina.
The challenge for Bernie Sanders
is that coming
close or winning narrowly isn't
enough for
him. He needs now to win at
least 55 percent
of all the delegates going
forward in order
to have a chance to catch up
with her.
GWEN IFILL: So, is this one of
those cases
-- I guess on both sides -- in
which, Stu,
you can win or you can lose and
you can still
keep winning? Does that make
sense? If you're
Hillary Clinton, you can lose
and you can
still get enough delegates that
he can't catch
up.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Right. Right,
exactly.
She has this -- she has an
advantage right
now of 200 in terms of pledged
delegates that
she won, but she has another
over 400 superdelegate
advantage. And, as Amy said,
each of these
states is a little different.
And states with
large -- basically, the red
states, Secretary
Clinton does really well in the
Republican
states. In the Democratic
states, she doesn't
do so well.
So, there's a tradeoff. In that
Michigan-Mississippi
contest, she lost Michigan, but
she won all
those delegates from
Mississippi, and she
ended up winning, even though
all the attention
was on how she lost Michigan.
GWEN IFILL: Let's talk about the
down-ballot
consequences, because this is
not just about
the presidential race. Everyone
-- people
who are sitting in the Senate
and even the
House are watching this all play
out very
carefully, Amy.
AMY WALTER: Absolutely.
And we're talking about a state
like Ohio.
Rob Portman, the freshman
Republican senator
elected in 2010 rather easily,
up for reelection
this year, he's already in a
very close race
with the former governor,
Democratic governor
of this state.
With somebody like Trump on the
top of the
ticket who is as polarizing as
he is, it is
going to be very tough for Rob
Portman not
to get pulled under by the Trump
phenomenon,
and not in a good way. I think
he will be
a weight on many Republicans
running in these
swing states, pulling them down.
You could even see that as the
House level,
too. It is very hard for me to
believe that,
with Donald Trump as the top of
the ticket,
that Republicans could hold the
Senate. They'd
likely lose the Senate. The only
question
is how many seats they lose.
GWEN IFILL: But that said, Stu,
all of the
talk, all the chatter this
weekend about violence
at Trump events, it's not really
losing Trump
any support at the top.
STUART ROTHENBERG: There is no
evidence of
that yet.
Look, Trump supporters were
attracted to him
very early. They locked in, and
their whole
world view is his world view. It
basically
is a sense that he's fighting
against the
media, the political
establishment. So, of
course, when they attack him,
when they portray
him as inciting violence,
they're just trying
to destroy him.
And so his supporters, I think,
are pretty
solid. Now, I don't think he's
going to lose
support there. Now, it may limit
his ability
to broaden support at any point,
but I don't
think it's shaken up the race
dramatically.
GWEN IFILL: Well, let me ask you
both, finally,
what are you chances here on
Super Tuesday
III eve, or whatever we're
calling this? What
is your guess about the chances
of this leading
to a contested convention, Amy?
AMY WALTER: Gosh, you put me on
the spot here.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
(LAUGHTER)
AMY WALTER: Let's see. Why do
you do that,
Gwen?
(LAUGHTER)
AMY WALTER: OK.
I think that -- I think Kasich
can win Ohio
tomorrow. To me, I'm going to
look at the
margins coming out of Ohio and
Illinois before
I give you an answer. But I
think we could
be looking at a contested
convention, especially
if Ted Cruz also runs well. Stu
is totally
right. The Trump vote is not
moving. It's
a question of where the rest of
the vote goes.
GWEN IFILL: Stu?
STUART ROTHENBERG: I don't know,
Gwen.
(LAUGHTER)
STUART ROTHENBERG: I would say
that I agree
with Amy that...
(CROSSTALK)
STUART ROTHENBERG: Well, I think
Trump's going
to have a really good day.
The question is, can he win
enough and how
close does he get? Is he going
to get 1,237?
I'm not sure he's going to be
there, but he
may be within spitting distance,
and they
may not be able to deny him the
nomination.
GWEN IFILL: OK. Well, we will be
checking
in with both of you on that.
Amy Walter of The Cook Political
Report, Stu
Rothenberg of The Rothenberg &
Gonzales Political
Report, thank you both very
much.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Thanks, Gwen.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome.
GWEN IFILL: We have more
politics coverage
online, including a story about
which GOP
candidates have benefited the
most from lobbyists.
There's a breakdown at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tomorrow marks
five years since
Syria's brutal civil war began,
killing hundreds
of thousands and displacing
millions more.
The humanitarian situation
remains the most
dire since the Second World War,
as halting
peace talks toward a resolution
begin again.
Chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret
Warner begins our coverage.
MARGARET WARNER: Huddled
together, hand in
hand, hundreds of migrants
streamed out of
a camp in Northern Greece today.
They trudged
along muddy trails and forded
surging rivers
in search of a break in the
border fence.
MAN: We hope we can cross
because we are a
lot of people. Our number is big
now.
MARGARET WARNER: They're fleeing
the overcrowded,
rain-soaked Idomeni camp, where
they have
been stranded since its northern
neighbor
Macedonia closed its border to
refugees last
week. Many are Syrians fleeing
the war in
at home.
In Geneva today, the first round
of United
Nations-brokered peace talks
aimed at ending
that conflict got under way, as
U.N. special
envoy to Syria, Staffan de
Mistura, hosted
Syria's ambassador to the U.N.
STAFFAN DE MISTURA, Special
United Nations
Envoy for Syria: We believe that
we should
have at least a clear road map.
I'm not saying
an agreement, but a clear road
map, because
that's what Syria is expecting
from all of
us.
As far as I know, the only plan
B available
is return to war, and to even
worse war than
we had so far.
MARGARET WARNER: The start of
talks come as
a tenuous cessation of
hostilities in Syria
entered its third week.
Today, five years since the
conflict began,
UNICEF painted a dire picture
for the country's
children. One in three Syrian
children has
been born since the war broke
out. And 8.4
million, or nearly 80 percent of
Syrian children,
are affected by the violence,
either within
the country or as refugees
elsewhere.
Meanwhile, the U.N. Refugee
Agency, UNHCR,
reported that 46 percent of the
more than
150,000 refugees inundating
Europe this year
came from Syria. Those numbers
outpace last
year's, when a record one
million people fled
to Europe.
Many make the perilous sea
crossing from Turkey
to Greece, but now, because
Balkan borders
are blocked, thousands are
stranded in Greece.
At an E.U. summit last week,
Turkish Prime
Minister Ahmet Davutoglu offered
to take back
huge numbers of migrants in
exchange for $3
billion in aid and progress on
Turkey's joining
the European Union.
The E.U. summit with Turkey
resumes later
this week, but the U.N. Refugee
Agency has
strongly objected to the deal,
saying it would
violate the European Human
Rights Convention.
That's where Jeffrey Brown picks
up the story.
JEFFREY BROWN: And joining me is
the new head
of that agency, Filippo Grandi,
United Nations
high commissioner for refugees.
Welcome to you.
FILIPPO GRANDI, UNITED NATIONS
HIGH COMMISSIONER
FOR REFUGEES: Thank you.
JEFFREY BROWN: Let's start with
that tentative
deal that Margaret was just
talking about
between the E.U. and Turkey.
What is your
objection to having Turkey bring
back some
of those refugees?
FILIPPO GRANDI: I think we
should put this
in context.
Turkey is the country that hosts
the largest
number of Syrian refugees. We
have heard it
2.7 million. In fact, it's the
countries that
host the largest numbers number
of refugees
worldwide, all kinds of
refugees.
And we have always promoted the
idea that
the responsibility of hosting
Syrian refugees
should be shared more widely.
Many of them
have reached Europe together
with refugees
of other countries, and we have
always encouraged
Europe to manage that flow in an
orderly way.
Unfortunately, this wasn't done.
Chaos has
followed. What we see in Greece
today is very
worried. Europe is reacting in
an emergency
manner and is now proposing to
-- is now discussing
with Turkey the possibility of
sending back
to Turkey some of these people.
Now, what
we're seeing...
JEFFREY BROWN: Would that not
create more
of an order -- orderly passage?
FILIPPO GRANDI: Well, first of
all, it needs
to be done, and if it is done,
it is called
technically readmission of
refugees from one
country to the other.
It needs to be done in a manner
that respects
the human rights, the rights of
these refugees.
So, what we're saying to Europe,
what we're
advising Europe, if it is done,
it needs to
be done in a manner that fully,
fully ensures
the guarantees for the people
that go back
that their protection and their
rights are
observed.
JEFFREY BROWN: Speaking of
Turkey and other
countries that border Syria,
where there are
so many refugees, and so many
financial precious
on these countries -- now, you
have had a
lot of pledges of money. Do they
get -- do
they have the resources to
handle the refugees
they have? Or is the money
coming through
that you need?
FILIPPO GRANDI: There was a
conference in
London at the beginning of
February in which
$11 billion were pledged to
support refugees
and hosting communities and host
countries
in the region.
Some of that money has been paid
and -- pledged
and paid, but we haven't got the
full picture
yet. What we are telling donor
governments
is that those pledges need to be
expedited,
because, for people on the
ground, results
have to be tangible and visible.
Otherwise,
the risk is that they will move
on and also
try to reach Europe.
JEFFREY BROWN: When you look at
countries
in Europe closing their borders,
you look
at political trends, even this
weekend elections
in Germany, do you see the tide
turning against
refugees in Europe?
FILIPPO GRANDI: We see a
hardening of the
position of certain governments
in respect
of receiving refugees.
What we are, of course, telling
Europe is
that the responsibility to take
care of refugees
should be shared globally. This
is -- Syria
has shown that this cannot be
any more the
responsibility of two, three
countries bordering
the country at war, Syria in
this case, but
has to be shared more widely,
including by
Europe.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, thousands of
refugees now
stranded in Greece, right? What
should be
done for those? What is the
situation there?
How dire is it? And what should
be done for
those people in the short term?
FILIPPO GRANDI: The situation is
dire.
People were trying to move on
for Greece.
The northern border was closed,
so now about
40,000 are stranded there, and
more are coming.
The important thing is to find
adequate sites
to host them temporarily until
solutions are
found, including, perhaps,
relocation through
Europe, a decision that Europe
made many months
ago, but which it didn't
implement.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, what do you
-- you were
talking earlier about donor
countries, the
pledges you have received. I
wonder about
the United States. What do you
want to see
come from the United States? Is
it more money?
Should the United States take in
more refugees?
FILIPPO GRANDI: The United
States is the largest
donor country to refugee
programs.
And it's also the country that
takes the largest
number of resettled refugees
from old nationalities.
Of course, the number of Syrians
that all
countries are taking through
resettlemento~
and other legal means of
transferring them
from one country to the other,
of course,
those numbers are still
inadequate, compared
to the 4.7 million that are
hosted by the
countries neighboring Syria.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, why is this
so tough to
crack? I mean, why does it seem
to get worse?
Why is there intransigence from
governments
that keeps people in this
flight? And how
long do you think the world has?
FILIPPO GRANDI: I think there's
a mixture
of motives that have made
governments and
sometimes public opinion more
resistant to
hosting refugees.
There are economic reasons,
economic downturn.
There's security reasons, the
fear, the unjustified
fears that refugees bring
terror. Refugees
flee terror. They don't bring
terror to countries.
Their arrival is very carefully
vetted, so
there should be no fear.
But there is an irrational fear,
which is,
in many countries, fueled by
political propaganda.
JEFFREY BROWN: And Margaret's
piece was talking
about the potential prospects
for a peace
settlement, but who knows,
right?
Do you expect, for the time
being, that the
flight of refugees will
continue?
FILIPPO GRANDI: Until there is
war, people
will try to flee.
This is in human nature. People
are afraid
of bombs, of destruction and
want to go away.
That is why what has happened in
Geneva today,
five years after the beginning
of the war,
the resumption of peace talks,
is so important.
It must succeed.
JEFFREY BROWN: Filippo Grandi is
U.N. high
commissioner for refugees.
Thank you so much.
FILIPPO GRANDI: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now the start of
a new election-year
series about the economic lives
of Americans,
the frustrations many face
trying to get ahead,
and the forces shaping the
economy.
In many way, the recovery seems
solid. The
unemployment rate is at its
lowest level since
the recession, and there's been
six consecutive
years of job growth. But many
Americans say
they don't feel it.
Our new multimedia series will
explore why
and how economic forces are
affecting individuals,
a joint project of the
"NewsHour," Marketplace
and PBS' "Frontline." We're
titling it How
the Deck Is Stacked.
Kai Ryssdal is the host of
Marketplace. And
he will be working on this
series with us.
He joins us from Los Angeles
tonight to discuss
a new poll commissioned by
Marketplace looking
at these issues.
So, Kai, welcome.
You are going to be tackling
something we
have been trying to understand
for a long
time.
KAI RYSSDAL, Marketplace: Yes,
we are.
You see people consistently rate
the economy
as the number one thing they're
worried about
in this country. It tops even
terrorism and
national security in most recent
polls from
other organizations.
So, we wanted to know why. What
is it about
people's individual economies
that makes them
say, this is the most important
thing for
us?
So, we went out with Edison
Research, and
we said to people, 1,000 people
across the
country, why? What is going on?
What are you
feeling in your own personal
economy? And
that's what this poll is all
about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you start
with some new
numbers that quantify people's
attitudes.
There was a percentage there I
found striking
who say they are sometimes or
frequently anxious
about their financial situation.
KAI RYSSDAL: Two thirds of
people in this
country, 61 percent of people,
say they are
sometimes or frequently anxious
about what's
going on in their lives.
And that's a bunch of things,
right? It's
making car payments. It's their
jobs. It's
where they see their future.
It's if they
have got enough saved for
retirement. They
are not feeling the thing that
the numbers,
which you cited in the
beginning, tell them
they should feel.
Jobs are up. We have added a
million jobs
in this economy since the last
time we went
out in the field in September,
and yet people
aren't feeling it. And that, to
me, is the
most interesting thing, that
what's going
on here is not being widely
shared down at
the middle and bottom ranges of
this economy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Kai, you
also found that
the anxiety is higher among
African-Americans
and among Hispanics.
KAI RYSSDAL: Right.
They're the ones who have not
saved for retirement.
They use payday loans more. They
see problems
with their inheritances. All of
these things
that the rest of us are feeling
sort of day
in and day out -- and I should
say, by the
way, that you have to separate
the wealthiest
part of this economy from the
rest of it.
Right?
But if you get down below the 1
percent, the
5 percent, there is deep
economic stress,
and African-Americans and
Latinos are feeling
that more acutely than anybody.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, you asked a
specific question
about -- that I found
fascinating -- about
how people would handle an
unexpected expense.
KAI RYSSDAL: Right.
So, we asked people, if you had
an unexpected
expense of $1,000 today, right
now, would
you be able to handle it? And we
asked it
because you can get $1,000 like
that. You
have a fender-bender, you trip
on a curb,
and there's a thousand bucks.
And so we said, would you be
able to make
that payment? Fifty-nine percent
of people
said they would have difficulty
making the
payment. And more importantly,
and really
more troubling, is that fully
half of that
group said they have nowhere to
turn for help.
They don't have a friend, they
don't have
a relative that could help them
out with $1,000.
And when you think about how
easy it is in
this economy today to turn
around and be hit
with a $1,000 bill for some kind
of expense,
that's a big issue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You also got some
interesting
results when you asked people
about the role
they feel Washington has played
in all this,
how angry they are specifically
at the nation's
capital.
KAI RYSSDAL: There is some
discontent.
I mean, and there are some
racial and ethnic
crosscurrents in there that you
have to sort
of parse out. But -- and as you
see out on
the campaign trail today, nobody
is very happy
with it going -- what's going on
in Washington.
You see that in Democrats, and
you see it
in Republicans. You see it in
independents.
People are not satisfied with
what's going
on. But -- and this is also
really interesting
-- there is great support for a
government
safety net. People want the
government. They
just don't want it the way it is
right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that one, I
know you are
going to keep trying to
understand.
But tell us a little bit,
finally, Kai, where
you are going to be going, what
parts of the
country and what kinds of
questions you are
going to be trying to
understand.
KAI RYSSDAL: Right.
So what we're going to do is,
we're going
to go out with "Frontline" and
some folks
from the "PBS NewsHour," and
we're going to
find the stories that tell the
people side
of this thing, right?
And I will give you an example.
I was in Tuscaloosa,
Alabama, a number of months ago
working for
a Marketplace story. And we met
a woman who
is a Ph.D. student in material
science at
the University of Alabama,
right? She's a
hard scientist. She is going to
get a job
in this new economy no matter
what, right?
She's working at a barbecue
joint in Tuscaloosa,
Alabama to make ends meet. She's
got $192,000
worth of debt. As I said, she's
going to get
a job once she gets her degree.
But what she said -- I said, how
do you feel?
What's it like out there as you
think about
the future? And she said: "I'm
scared. I'm
scared."
And so we're going to find the
stories that
sort of pull that thread
through, why people
aren't feeling good about what,
according
to the numbers, is a rising
economy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we are
looking forward
to the entire series, going to
be working
with you, talking to you
throughout the rest
of this election year and
beyond.
Kai Ryssdal, thank you very
much.
KAI RYSSDAL: You bet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we want to
hear more from
you about where we should go and
what issues
you feel should be part of our
series.
The series is funded in part by
the Corporation
for Public Broadcasting.
You can go to our Web site, and
you will see
a place where you can give us
your feedback
on how the deck is stacked.
GWEN IFILL: We will be back in
just a moment.
But, first, take this time to
hear from your
local PBS station. It's a chance
to offer
your support, which helps keep
programs like
ours on the air.
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: And an update before
we go.
This evening, the Senate
confirmed John King
as
the next secretary of education
by a 40-49
This evening, the Senate
confirmed John King
as
the next secretary of education
by a 40-49
vote. King had been serving as
the department's
acting secretary since Arne
Duncan stepped
down from the post at the end of
last year, and he previously
served at New
York state's commissioner of
education.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On
the "NewsHour" online: Math
geeks and sweet
tooths alike are celebrating Pi
Day today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On
the "NewsHour" online: Math
geeks and sweet
tooths alike are celebrating Pi
Day today.
March 14 marks the mathematical
constant that
begins with 3.14.
But our resident science
producer isn't convinced
that pi is so special. You can
read his take
But our resident science
producer isn't convinced
that pi is so special. You can
read his take
on our home page.
And in our poetry series: how
language and
verse helped a young
undocumented poet find
And in our poetry series: how
language and
verse helped a young
undocumented poet find
his voice to speak about
immigration.
All that
and more is
on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
All that
and more is
on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: Later tonight on
"Charlie Rose":
What's behind the drawdown of
Russia's troops
in Syria?
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Tuesday, with
voters heading to the polls in
five states,
we will have reports from Ohio,
Florida and
Illinois.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.